[docs] Add initial documentation for read-write mode (#3951)
grafana/mimir: docs/sources/mimir/operators-guide/deploy-grafana-mimir/jsonnet/migrate-from-microservices-to-read-write.md

---
description:

>   Learn how to migrate from a cluster deployed with as microservices to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Migrate from a cluster deployed with as microservices to
```

>   a cluster in read-write mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  one in read-write mode.
```

menuTitle: Migrate from microservices to read-write mode
title: Migrate from microservices to read-write mode without downtime
weight: 40
---

# Migrate from microservices to read-write mode without downtime

> **Warning:**

> > Read-Write mode is considered experimental, as is migrating between the modes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Read-Write mode is considered experimental, as well as migrating between the modes.
```

Reviewer: Rationale: sounds too much like "as-is".

> At a high level the basic process of steps to complete is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At a high level, the steps involved are as follows:
```

> 1. Deploy read-write components along side microservices (they join the same ring).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Deploy read-write components alongside microservices; they join the same ring.
```
Ambiguous "they": "they" == "components", or "they" == "microservices"?

Author: Will update to "they both"

> 1. Switch over end points in your ingress.

Reviewer: I need to revisit the structure of this doc because the high-level steps can have `Step 1:` etc. but there are many steps. I will come back to this tomorrow.

Author: The high level steps are meant to portray the general process. There are a number of specific items to complete in order to do what the process is describing. I'm open to suggestions.

Reviewer: I will look at the structure in a subsequent PR. Best to iterate as you suggested in a DM. :)

# Diff deployments and statefulsets:

## Write
diff --color=always distributor.yaml mimir-write-zone-a.yaml
diff --color=always ingester-zone-a.yaml mimir-write-zone-a.yaml
diff --color=always ingester-zone-b.yaml mimir-write-zone-b.yaml
diff --color=always ingester-zone-c.yaml mimir-write-zone-c.yaml

## Read
diff --color=always query-frontend.yaml mimir-read.yaml
diff --color=always querier.yaml mimir-read.yaml
diff --color=always ruler-query-frontend.yaml mimir-read.yaml
diff --color=always ruler-querier.yaml mimir-read.yaml

## Backend
diff --color=always overrides-exporter.yaml mimir-backend-zone-a.yaml
diff --color=always query-scheduler.yaml mimir-backend-zone-a.yaml
diff --color=always ruler-query-scheduler.yaml mimir-backend-zone-a.yaml
diff --color=always ruler.yaml mimir-backend-zone-a.yaml
diff --color=always compactor.yaml mimir-backend-zone-a.yaml
diff --color=always store-gateway-zone-a.yaml mimir-backend-zone-a.yaml
diff --color=always store-gateway-zone-b.yaml mimir-backend-zone-b.yaml
diff --color=always store-gateway-zone-c.yaml mimir-backend-zone-c.yaml

> 

Reviewer 2: [nit]
```suggestion
```

```

## Step 3: Migrate read-path to read-write service

Scale up the Mimir read component using either the autoscaler or explicitly setting the number of replicas. (Keep the current microservices at their present level of replicas or autoscaling).

```jsonnet
{
  _config+:: {
    deployment_mode: 'migration',

    mimir_write_replicas: 0,
    mimir_read_replicas: 3,
    mimir_backend_replicas: 0,
    autoscaling_mimir_read_enabled: false,
  },
}
```

```jsonnet
{
  _config+:: {
    deployment_mode: 'migration',

    mimir_write_replicas: 0,
    mimir_backend_replicas: 0,
    autoscaling_mimir_read_enabled: true,
    autoscaling_mimir_read_min_replicas: 3,
    autoscaling_mimir_read_max_replicas: 30,
  },
}
```

> The Read-write querier at this point will start running queries from the `query-scheduler` (as they share the same ring).

Reviewer 2: I would organize these sub-steps is in a numbered list. They will be easier to consume.

  },
}
```

Then scale down the replicas for all components:

```jsonnet
{
  _config+:: {
    multi_zone_store_gateway_replicas: 0,
    autoscaling_querier_enabled: false,
  },

  query_frontend_deployment+:
    deployment.mixin.spec.withReplicas(0),

  query_scheduler_deployment+:
    deployment.mixin.spec.withReplicas(0),

  querier_deployment+:
    deployment.mixin.spec.withReplicas(0),

  ruler_deployment+:
    deployment.mixin.spec.withReplicas(0),

  overrides_exporter_deployment+:
    deployment.mixin.spec.withReplicas(0),

  compactor_statefulset+:
    statefulSet.mixin.spec.withReplicas(0),
}

```

Ensure backend components (`query-scheduler`, `compactor`, `ruler`, `store-gateway`) correctly left their respective rings (Query-scheduler, Compactor, Ruler, Store-gateway).

It is now safe to disable [ruler remote evaluation]({{< relref "configure-ruler.md#operational-modes" >}}). (This needs to be done after the microservices ruler has been scaled down, otherwise rule evaluations may fail).

```jsonnet
{
  _config+:: {
    ruler_remote_evaluation_enabled: false,
    autoscaling_ruler_querier_enabled: false,
  },
}
```

## Step 6: Migrate write path to read-write deployment

> Scale up `mimir-write`.

Reviewer 2: I would use a numbered list here too.

```jsonnet
{
  _config+:: {
    mimir_write_replicas: 3,
  },
}
```

Configure your load-balancer to route write requests to `mimir-write`.

Ensure the microservice distributor is no longer receiving write requests:

`sum by (job) (rate(cortex_request_duration_seconds_count{job=~".*distributor.*", route=~"/distributor.Distributor/Push|/httpgrpc.*|api_(v1|prom)_push|otlp_v1_metrics"}[1m]))`

## Step 7: Scale down write microservices

> Scale down `distributor`:

Reviewer 2: I would use a numbered list here too.

---

> description: Migrate from a cluster deployed with as microservices to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Migrate from a cluster deployed as microservices to
```
Please vet this change for technical accuracy.
